# Abstract

This study is designed to investigate the economic impact of eThekwini Municipality’s capital expenditure (infrastructure investment) on its total revenue collection. The time series econometric method of the vector autoregressive (VAR) model of Sim (1980)\* was employed for the analysis. The study used monthly time series data which covered the period 2015M1 to 2021M12. We discover that there is a positive relationship between capital expenditure and revenue collection. As a result, for every 1% increase in CAPEX, 0.1% more revenue is collected after infrastructure repairs/upgrades. This only applies in the short run, so an increase of 1% in CAPEX will only temporarily raise revenue by 1%, implying that the increase will not be sustained indefinitely. The City must ensure that CAPEX routinely rises in the short-term to maintain revenue growth. A regular short-term expenditure on infrastructure repairs and upgrades will be necessary as a practical method of maintaining a rise in revenue. The status quo indicates the steep decline in capital budget spending comes against a backdrop of man-made and natural disasters which required increased capital investment into infrastructure. Also found that the capital budget for eThekwini Municipality comes in third place, it is behind by R3.7 billion in other major cities. The revenues collected from energy in 2021/22 increased by 2.9% (even though electricity relies more on tariff increases) and water consumption fell by 12.8% due to infrastructure damages during flooding.
