# Capital Budget Performance of SA’s Major Metros

This section compares eThekwini’s capital spending to those of the major cities in South Africa in order to observe if there is a spending gap between us and the rest of the Cities. The budget for SA Metros’ total expenses is **R302.4 billion** in 2021–2022, and it rises to **R341.3 billion** in 2023–2024. Given those metropolitan areas are widely regarded as economic growth engines, this emphasises the overall significance of these areas in promoting economic growth and job creation (MTREF National Treasury, 2022). SA Metros’ capital expenditures make up an average of **52.1%** of all municipal capital budgets over the course of the 2021/22 MTREF (Medium Term Revenue and Expenditure Framework ).

The average capital investments made by the cities of Cape Town and Johannesburg are **R9.0 billion** and **R7.3 billion**, respectively, whereas eThekwini makes an average capital budget investment of **R5.3 billion**, falling behind Cape Town by **R3.7 billion**. When compared to other metros, eThekwini ranks third in terms of capital expenditure and third in terms of GDP growth. This highlights the relationship between capital expenditures and the metros’ GDP growth. When considering the three negative shocks (COVID-19, unrest, and floods) that have occurred in rapid order, the question of whether the capital budget given in Durban is sufficient to mitigate and quickly recover from all three shocks is raised. The largest capital budgets are in Cape Town, the City of Johannesburg, and eThekwini, at **2.8%**, **2.7%**, and **1.8%** of the total budget for metros, respectively (operating and capital expenditure). The City of Tshwane’s capital budget is relatively low at **1.3%** and decreases over the MTREF when benchmarked against the above-mentioned metros. However, it is closely comparable to the City of Ekurhuleni.
